===========================
    Tangelo Web Services
===========================

Tangelo's special power lies in its ability to run user-created *web services*
as part of a larger web application.  Essentially, each Python file in Tangelo's
web space is associated to a URL; requesting this URL (e.g., by visiting it in a
browser) will cause Tangelo to load the file as a Python module, run a
particular function found within it, and return the output as the content for
the URL.

In other words, **Tangelo web services** mean that **Python code** can become
**web resources**.  Python is a flexible and powerful programming language with
a comprehensive standard library and a galaxy of third-party modules providing
access to all kinds of APIs and software libraries.

Tangelo web services are exactly as powerful as the Python code that drives
them, **so Tangelo web services are very powerful**.

General Services
================

Let's begin with a really simple example.  Suppose
``/home/riker/tangelo_html/calc.py`` reads as follows:

.. code-block:: python

    allowed = ["add", "subtract", "multiply", "divide"]

    def run(operation, a=None, b=None):
        if a is None:
            return "Parameter 'a' is missing!"
        elif b is None:
            return "Parameter 'b' is missing!"

        try:
            a = float(a)
        except ValueError:
            return "Argument 'a' ('%s') must be a number!" % (a)

        try:
            b = float(b)
        except ValueError:
            return "Argument 'b' ('%s') must be a number!" % (b)

        try:
            if operation == "add":
                return a + b
            elif operation == "subtract":
                return a - b
            elif operation == "multiply":
                return a * b
            elif operation == "divide":
                return a / b
            else:
                return "Unsupported operation: %s\nAllowed operations are: %s" % (operation, ", ".join(allowed))
        except ValueError:
            return "Could not %s '%s' and '%s'" % (operation, a, b)

This is a Python module named ``calc``, implementing a very rudimentary
four-function calculator in the ``run()`` function.  Tangelo will respond to a
request for the URL ``http://localhost:8080/~riker/calc/add?a=33&b=14``
(**without** the trailing ``.py``) by loading ``calc.py`` as a Python module,
executing its ``run()`` function, and returning the result - in this case, the
string ``47`` - as the contents of the URL.

The ``run()`` function takes three arguments:  a positional argument named
``operation``, and two keyword arguments named ``a`` and ``b``.  Tangelo maps
the positional arguments to any "path elements" found after the name of the
script in the URL (in this case, ``add``), while keyword arguments are mapped to
query parameters (``33`` and ``14`` in this case).  In other words, the example
URL is the equivalent of running the following short Python script:

.. code-block:: python

    import calc
    print calc.run("add", "33", "14")

Note that *all arguments are passed as strings.*  This is due to the way URLs
and associated web technologies work - the URL itself is simply a string, so it
is chunked up into tokens which are then sent to the server.  These arguments
must therefore be cast to appropriate types at run time.

Generally speaking, the web endpoints exposed by Tangelo for each Python file
are not meant to be visited directly in a web browser; instead, they provide
data to a web application using Ajax calls to retrieve the data.  Suppose we
wish to use ``calc.py`` in a web calculator application, which includes an HTML
file with two fields for the user to type inputs into, and four buttons, one for
each arithmetic operation.  An associated Javascript file might have code like
the following:

.. code-block:: javascript

    function do_arithmetic(op) {
        var a_val = $("#input-a").val();
        var b_val = $("#input-a").val();

        $.ajax({
            url: "calc/" + op,
            data: {
                a: a_val,
                b: b_val
            },
            dataType: "text",
            success: function (response) {
                $("#result").text(response);
            }
        });
    }

    $("#plus").click(function () {
        do_arithmetic("add");
    };

    $("#minus").click(function () {
        do_arithmetic("subtract");
    };

    $("#times").click(function () {
        do_arithmetic("multiply");
    };

    $("#divide").click(function () {
        do_arithmetic("divide");
    };

The ``do_arithmetic()`` function is called whenever the operation buttons are
clicked; it contains a call to the JQuery ``ajax()`` function, which prepares a
URL with query parameters then retrieves data from it.  The ``success`` callback
then takes the response from the URL and places it on the webpage so the user
can see the result.  In this way, your web application front end can connect to
the Python back end via Ajax.

Return Types
------------

The type of the value returned from the ``run()`` function determines how Tangelo creates
content for the associated web end point.  In the example above, the function
returns a number; Tangelo receives this number and turns it into a string (which
is then delivered to the ``success`` callback in the Javascript code above).  In
general, Tangelo follows this set of steps to determine what to do with the
returned value from a Python service:

.. todo::
    Link "server error" to the docs about how to raise an HTTP error.

#. If the return value is a **Python object containing a** ``next()``
   **method**, Tangelo stores the object in the streaming table, and its
   contents can be retrieved via the streaming API (see :ref:`below <streaming>`).

#.  Otherwise, if the return value is a **JSON-serializable Python object**,
    Tangelo calls ``json.dumps()`` on it to convert it into a string, and then
    delivers that string as the content.

    Python's numeric types are JSON-serializable by default, as is the value
    ``None``.  Lists and tuples of serializable items are converted into JSON
    lists, while dictionaries with serializable keys and values are converted
    into JSON objects.  Finally, any Python object *can be made*
    JSON-serializable by making them extend ``json.JSONEncoder`` (see the
    `Python documentation
    <http://docs.python.org/2/library/json.html#json.JSONEncoder>`_ for more
    information).

    If a **non**-JSON-serializable object is returned, this will result in a
    server error.

#. Otherwise, if the return value is a **string**, then Tangelo treats the
   return value as the final result; i.e., it delivers the return value without
   changing it.

#. Finally, if the return value **somehow does not fit into any of the above
   steps**, Tangelo will report a server error.

RESTful Services
================

Tangelo also supports the creation of REST services.  Instead of placing
functionality in a ``run()`` function, such a service has one function per
desired REST verb.  For example, a rudimentary service to manage a collection of
databases might look like the following:

.. code-block:: python

    import tangelo
    import lcarsdb

    @tangelo.restful
    def get(dbname, query):
        db = lcarsdb.connect("enterprise.starfleet.mil", dbname)
        if not db:
            return None
        else:
            return db.find(query)



.. _streaming:

Streaming
=========
